“TAU-800A” is an installation of an anachronistic computer, with some very unique features. It is the second piece in a series. 

== Description ==

The installation is composed of two main elements: first, and more visibly, a sleek interface of retro-futuristic design is shown on a CRT display, buzzing with activity in what is implied to be calculation, as indicated by labels of "stack", "flags", and the constant stream of assembly commands being executed. This is intended to evoke an outdated conception of a futuristic computer, such as one is familiar with from depictions of futuristic technology in older fiction. 

Next to this display sits a visibly handled, even mistreated, stack of papers, on the cover of which “TAU-800A — Quick-start guide” can be read. Upon inspection, it becomes apparent that this is a manual to the computer described above, albeit a copy which as been extensively annotated, highlighted, and has even had coffee spilled on it. Reading a bit further, we see that the computer is riddled with anachronism: on one hand, it has severe limitations typical of 1960s and 70s mainframes (the manual is copyrighted “© 1973”), such as a small amount of RAM, 6-bit bytes, and a restrictive assembly language (indeed the style of the manual is intended as a homage to the aesthetic of those mainframes, whose hardcopy manuals were an essential component of everyday use). On the other hand though, the manual repeatedly (and matter-of-factly) refers to the time travelling assisted computing capabilities of the machine. 

In fact, TAU-800A is a machine which can not only reference its current state (memory, etc) for its calculations, as any regular computer does, but also read from, and write to, the past and the future. This extraordinary technology enables it to complete tasks in an impossible amount of time, since it can bend time to reach into the future and retrieve an answer which has not yet been calculated, and use it to produce the value which itself will have been read when the world reaches that point in the future (does your head hurt yet?). 

The contents on the screen are not random, but are in fact a faithful implementation of the TAU-800A as described in the manual, complete with time jumps and temporal paradox resolution. This implementation serves as a conceptual cornerstone of the piece. In this we were inspired by our background in physics and by the idea of the Novikov self-consistency principle, an attempt at a theoretical treatment of the paradoxes introduced by time travel, a perennially popular topic in art and literature. 

== Concept ==

The predecessor of TAU-800A, titled “TAU-800B Super”, was conceived as an exploration of anachronism in the form of an interactive installation, for an exhibition on that theme (Processing Community Day 2021, Coimbra, Portugal). We approached this from multiple directions, in particular combining “old” and futuristic technology in the same piece. This was embodied by an implementation of a severely outdated computer with a retro-futuristic aesthetic in its display, which also possesses the fantastical ability of using time travel to enhance its capabilities of computation. 

Conceptually, that piece was focused on actually bringing such a machine to life: to truly emulate the proposed design for the machine—time travel included—, to truly run a program that obeys the provided specification, and to provide an accurate reference manual and other material which the audience can consult. With this, we mimic our own relationship with technology: in an era where advanced tech is everywhere and plays an ubiquitous role in our lives, we yet seem to understand very little about its inner workings. Many times, it almost seems as inescrutable as magic, yet we do know its inner workings can be rationally explained. We are faced with something that seems perhaps weird and out of place, but we know we are able, in principle, to come to understand these inner workings through observation and study of the surrounding materials—in this case the manual, and the physical implementation of the machine. Ultimately you can make rational sense, within the provided rules, of what you have in front of you. Technology is intentionally created, and so there is appeal in the tension between an alien look and an awareness that it’s a rational object. 

However, after developing the first piece, we realised that many of the design choices we made when conceiving what an “old” computer should look like actually resulted from our own personal reconstruction of incomplete information and stereotypes about the past of computation. In fact, the very concept of an “old computer” (with such a broad meaning) only makes sense through this prism, of someone in the present, looking back at a past that they don't fully understand because they don't live in it, and can only ever experience it second-hand through documents and artefacts.

This realisation resonated with us, especially since there is a common feeling of reliving history from 100 years ago: we’ve had a pandemic, two economic recessions in a decade, there are struggles to maintain democracy, and rising threats of violence and wars of conquest. There seems to be a broad desire for a different organisation of society, one that is more fair and doesn’t allow for such concentration of power and resources. But again, these parallels are essentially flawed, in the sense that each of the corresponding events from a hundred years ago had its own set of causes and particular social context, which can never be literally transposed to the present day without falling into over-simplification, stereotypes, or even outright misrepresentation. 

These aren't new considerations—the notion of historic recurrence has been discussed since antiquity—but what we propose here is something slightly different: it’s not that people forget the past, it’s that they misremember the past, or that they build some picture based on incomplete information or misinterpretation, and tend to force the reality of some past time into the perspective of the present. 

We’re not completely aware of the circumstances which surrounded the major events of history, and frankly, how could we? The past is made of many details, far away in time, forming a whole, and not a discrete set of atomic events. Their complexity is distilled into a simplified picture. Like our installation, these perceptions of the past are a simulacrum: an image of something which never did truly exist. 

And, so, if we are condemned to repeat the past, we do so in a modernised way, always slightly differently, always informed by all the circumstances of the present.

This is the perspective with which we present TAU-800A: a mish-mash of the past and the future which is, in fact, a reflection of a present day perception of past and future.

== Technical aspects ==

In terms of technical realisation, the installation has the following main parts. (1) A CRT screen, which shows the user-visible futuristic interface, driven by a hidden Raspberry Pi which runs the emulation (programmed in Rust) and the visual interface (written with web technologies). (2) A manual, as well as hardcopy printouts of assembly programs (typeset in LaTeX, and then physically manipulated: annotations in ballpoint or highlighter, sticky notes, coffee spills, etc); these are set on a desk and/or pinned onto a corkboard, next to the machine and its display. (3) A punch card reader, whose input the machine runs. The viewer is invited to engage with the piece not only by observing the display but also by physically examining the manual and the annotated source code of the program, and punching their own programs which can be read by the punch card reader. 


