“TAU-800B Super” is an installation of an anachronistic computer, with some very unique features. It was originally conceived as an exploration of anachronism in the form of an interactive installation, for an exhibition on that theme (Processing Community Day 2021, Coimbra, Portugal). 

The installation is composed of two main elements: first, and more prominently, a sleek interface of retro-futuristic design, inspired by anime/weeb shit/wipeout/XYZ, is buzzing with activity in what is implied to be calculation, as indicated by labels of "stack", "flags", and the constant stream of assembly commands being executed. This is intended to immediately evoke not only a futuristic computer, but *a past conception of a futuristic computer*, such as one is familiar with from depictions of futuristic technology in older fiction. In the centre of the screen, there is a four-digit display. 

Next to this display sits a visibly handled, even mistreated, stack of papers, on the cover of which “TAU-800B Super — Quick-start guide” can be read. Upon inspection, it becomes apparent that this is a manual to the computer described above, albeit a copy which as been extensively annotated, highlighted, and has even had coffee spilled on it. Reading a bit further, we see that the computer is riddled with anachronism: on one hand, it has severe limitations typical of 1960s and 70s mainframes (the manual is copyrighted “© 1973”), such as a small amount of RAM, 6-bit bytes, and a restrictive assembly language (indeed the style of the manual is intended to be a homage to the aesthetic of those mainframes, whose hardcopy manuals were an essential component for everyday use in an era before online documentation). On the other hand though, beside the retro-futuristic display described above, the manual repeatedly (and matter-of-factly) refers to the time travelling assisted computing capabilities of the machine. 

In fact, TAU-800B Super is a machine which can not only reference its current state (memory, etc) for its calculations, as any regular computer does, but also *read from and write to the past and the future*. This extraordinary technology enables it to complete tasks in an impossible amount of time, since it can bend time to reach into the future and retrieve an answer which has not yet been calculated, and use it to produce the value which itself will have been read when the world reaches that point in the future (is your head hurting yet?). However, great care must be taken to ensure that the execution of the program does not create any temporal paradoxes (the manual is filled with warnings and disclaimers of liability to this effect)! By perusing the manual, one also gets the sense that this is a commonplace technology in the alternate reality to which the machine belongs, notwithstanding the transistor technology being that of the 1970s. This feature is the second way in which the piece approaches the theme of anachronism, by being a machine that literally goes “against time” (ana- + chronos).  

We note that the processes on the screen and the content displayed are not random, but are in fact a faithful emulation of the TAU-800B Super as described in the manual, complete with time jumps and timeline consistency guarantees. Part of this background process is shown in notes mixed in the quick start guide. This emulation is only exposed to the viewer via the display, but serves as a conceptual cornerstone of the piece. The example program running on the machine writes the current time alternately forwards and backwards, and then calculates the square root of that number in an impossibly short amount of time, assisted by time travel, in what is also a final nod to the theme of anachronism (the etymology of the word being “backwards”+“time”). 

In this we were inspired by our background in physics and by the idea of the Novikov self-consistency principle, an attempt at a theoretical treatment of the paradoxes introduced by unrestricted time travel. Time-travel, as we know, has a long history stretching not only to Wells' “The Time Machine” but to medieval and ancient tales around the world. A principle similar to the Novikov self-consistency principle was even introduced in the novel “By His Bootstraps”, by Robert Heinlein, decades prior to its proper formulation. 

In terms of technical realisation, the installation has two parts. (1) A screen, no more than 50" in diagonal, which shows the user-visible futuristic interface, driven by a hidden Raspberry Pi which runs the emulation (programmed in Rust) and the visual interface (written with web technologies). (2) A manual, as well as hardcopy printouts of assembly programs (typeset in LaTeX, and then physically manipulated: annotations in ballpoint or highlighter, sticky notes, coffee spills, etc); these are set on a desk and/or pinned onto a corkboard, next to the machine and its display. The viewer is invited to engage with the piece not only by observing the display but also by physically examining the manual and the annotated source code of the program. 